SEO has already changed. Here's what's
coming next in 2026. 2026 is a year AI
search goes fully adriven. Chad GBT,
Perplexity, and Google's AI results are
all becoming the new front door to buyer
ready traffic, and the brands that adapt
now will own the flow of attention.
We're entering a brand new ecosystem
where organic visibility and paid
placement collide inside the very
answers people trust to make decisions.
In this video, I'll give you the inside
look of what major tech companies are
planning behind closed doors and why
understanding these moves now puts you
ahead of 99% of marketers who are still
optimizing for yesterday's search
landscape. Because in 2026, it's not
just about being found. It's about being
chosen as the answer. Let's dive in.
Every service you've ever loved
eventually needs to make money. And
that's not a betrayal. It's just how
sustainable systems work. Think about
the physical world for a moment. When
you walk into a Costco, you get free
samples. But those aren't random acts of
kindness. They're marketing. Magazines
have always mixed editorial content with
sponsored articles. Movies have product
placements woven throughout the story
line. None of this feels manipulative
because it's transparent. You understand
the value exchange. The store provides
free samples and in return, you might
discover something you may want to buy.
The magazine provides entertainment and
information and advertisers help fund
that content. The digital world has
always followed the same pattern. Radio
started as pure content, then they added
commercial breaks. Television did the
same thing. When the internet arrived,
websites were mostly informational until
banner ads appeared. Social media
platforms began as community spaces,
then introduced sponsored posts and
targeted advertising. Now, we're seeing
the same evolution with AI search. It's
not a corruption of some pure ideal.
It's the natural progression of any
valuable service that starts free.
Here's the fundamental economics. When
you're not paying money for something,
your attention becomes a product. That's
not sinister. It's just math. These
platforms need revenue to keep the
lights on, pay their engineers, and
continue innovating. The alternative
isn't some advertising free utopia. The
alternative is subscription only
services that most people can't and
won't pay for. Look at what happened
when Twitter tried to push people on
subscriptions under Elon's ownership.
What they found was most people didn't
want to pay. The free users is what
caused a lot of the engagement. People
prefer free access with ads over paid
access without them. Chat GPT went from
1 million users in late 2022 to over 700
million weekly active users by September
2025 based on their announcements, but
only 4% of them pay for subscriptions.
That means 672
million people are using the service for
free. Those users still cost Open AI
money. Server costs, model training,
customer support, the math has to work
somehow. This is why the integration of
advertising into AI search isn't a
betrayal of the technologies promise.
It's a natural evolution that makes the
technology sustainable and accessible to
everyone.
Open AI is hemorrhaging money faster
than any startup in history and that
creates the most predictable outcome
imaginable. Let's talk numbers. Open AAI
was recently valued at $300 billion,
making it one of the most valuable
companies in the world, but valuation
and profitability are two very different
things. Sam Alman recently posted on
social media, "Insane thing. We are
currently losing money on OpenAI Pro
subscriptions. People use it so much
more than we expected." That's a CEO of
a $300 billion company admitting that
they're losing money on their premium
product. Internal documents show that
Open AI told investors it won't be
profitable until 2029. Think about that
timeline. A company burning through
billions of dollars with a 5-year runway
to profitability and investors expecting
massive return. This creates what I call
a financial pressure cooker. The math
has to work. And there's only one way to
really monetize 672 million free users
at scale. Advertising. Which brings us
to the smoking gun. Open AAI's hire of
Fiji Simo as their CEO of applications.
Simo isn't just any executive. She spent
over a decade at Meta where she led the
launch of ads on the newsfeed and headed
up monetization for the Facebook app.
She helped build Facebook's advertising
business into the revenue machine it is
today. Before joining OpenAI, she was
the CEO of Instakar where she turned the
company into a major retail advertising
platform. When a company hires someone
whose entire career was built on
creating and scaling multi-billion
dollar advertising platforms to run
their consumer applications, that's not
an accident. That's a signal. And we
have the internal projections to prove
it. Documents from April 2025 show Open
AI is forecasting $1 billion in revenue
from free user monetization starting in
2026, growing to nearly $25 billion by
2029. Just 4 months earlier in December
2024, Open AAI CFO Sarah Frier said the
company had no active plans for ads.
That's a complete reversal in strategy
in just 4 months and it aligns perfectly
with Simo's hiring and expertise. This
isn't speculation anymore. The financial
pressure is real. The executive talent
is in place and the internal projections
are set. 2026 is when OpenAI needs
advertising revenue to hit their growth
targets.
Google just broke their own golden goose
and they had no choice. For 25 years,
Google's entire business model was built
on a simple premise. You type in a
search, you get a list of links, and
Google gets paid when you click on a
sponsored result. It's that simple. That
model generated over $200 billion in
search revenue last year alone. To give
you a viewpoint on how profitable this
is, Google is actually the most
profitable company currently in
existence with over $115 billion a year
in net income. But that user behavior
that made Google so rich is changing
fast. The numbers tell the story. Our
research at NP digital tracking AI
platform growth shows ChatGpt absolutely
dominating the landscape. While Gemini,
Claude, Perplexity, and Deepseek have
all gained some traction, chat GBT
search interest dwarfs them all
combined. At the same time, Google's CEO
announced that when Google has AI
relevant results, they're seeing over a
10 plus% increase in usage. In other
words, they're starting to really
compete with Chat GPT. Now, all these
players are adapting because it's no
longer a gradual shift. It's behavioral
migration happening in real time. Google
noticed and they realized they had two
choices. Fight it or own it. They chose
to own it, even if it means
cannibalizing their own cash cow.
Google's already testing ads in AI mode
and AI overviews. They briefed agencies
on how the ads will work in AI mode with
a full roll out expected before Q4 of
2025. The big change, the way ads target
users will ship from individual keywords
to full conversation context. Instead of
advertisers bidding on project
management software, you're now reaching
someone who is having complete
conversation with AI about their remote
team challenges, integration needs, and
specific budget constraints. This
represents a fundamental shift from a
linkbased search to answerbased search.
Instead of showing 10 blue links and
hoping that a user clicks through,
Google's AI provides direct answers and
embeds advertising within those
responses. It's a defense strategy born
out of necessity. Google can't afford to
lose search market share to tag GPT and
perplexity. So, they're reshaping their
entire business model to match how
people actually want to search. And it's
working. Google actually reported that
they now get over five trillion searches
a year. The irony is that Google is
disrupting themselves to prevent others
from disrupting them. They're breaking
their own golden goose because they see
the writing on the wall. The future of
search is conversational, not
transactional.
In 2026, your brand won't compete for
clicks. It'll compete the answer. This
shift changes everything about how
digital marketing works. Traditional SEO
was about ranking for keywords. AI
search is about being cited as an
authoritative source. Think about the
difference in user behavior. Traditional
search looks like this. Best CRM
software, pizza near me, how to lose
weight, short, simple, keyword focus.
But AI mode searches look completely
different. People are typing in things
like, "I'm running a 15 person marketing
agency and need a CRM that integrates
with Google Sheets because that's where
we run a lot of our accounting reports
and we want advanced reports and the
cost has to be under $200 a month. What
are my best options?" The second search
contains incredible rich intent data.
The AI knows your company size, specific
integration requirements, your feature
priorities, and your exact budget
constraints. This is why targeting is
moving from keywords to conversation
context. Your ads won't just trigger
when someone types CRM software. They'll
trigger when the AI determines that
someone in the conversation exactly what
you're selling, even if they never use
the specific words you traditionally
targeted. But here's a bigger shift. A
doesn't just rank websites anymore. It
recommends answers. Chat GBT doesn't
just show you 10 links and lets you
choose. It tells you what it thinks is
the best with citations to back up its
recommendations. This makes AI systems
digital gatekeepers. If the AI doesn't
trust your content enough to site,
you're invisible. If it does trust you,
you're not just getting traffic, you're
getting endorsement, and that's what
really drives Revy. This creates a new
form of authority building. Instead of
competing for rankings, you're competing
for citation credibility. The brands
that win are the ones that create
content so authoritative, so well
structured that AI systems naturally
reference them when answering questions.
And here's the data that proves why this
matters. Our study of 300 businesses
across different verticals show Chat GPT
doesn't just dominate in volume, it
dominates in value. Chat GPT drives 87%
of AI traffic and 82% of AIdriven sales.
Meanwhile, all the other platforms
combined, Copilot, Perplexi, Gemini,
Claude, account for less than 20% of
actual revenue. This isn't just about
getting more visitors. It's about
getting visitors who convert. Early
movers focusing on chat GPT optimization
are getting massive advantages just like
early advertisers on Facebook or Google.
The attention is underpriced because
most brands haven't figured out how to
optimize for AI citation yet. Now,
before I reveal what this means for your
business strategy, let me quickly
mention something. If you're watching
this and thinking, I see where this is
headed, but I need help positioning my
brand for what's coming. I understand
the shift to AIdriven search and
advertising isn't just theoretical
anymore. It's happening right now. And
the window for early positioning is
closing fast. That's exactly what NP
Digital does for clients. We help
businesses get featured in AI answers
today and position them to dominate when
these advertising platforms fully
launch. We've developed systems for
citation optimization, conversational
content structuring, and AI authority
building that most agencies haven't even
heard of yet. Instead of scrambling to
catch up in 2026, you can be one of the
brands that's already winning when
everyone wakes up to this shift. Go to
npdigital.com, book a free consultation,
and we'll show you exactly how we can
get you ahead of this curve. All right.
Now, let me show you why this evolution
isn't just inevitable, it's already
unstoppable.
Every platform that gives away something
valuable for free eventually faces the
same choice, ads or debt. We've seen
this story play out repeatedly. YouTube
started as pure video sharing platform,
then introduced pre-roll ads, midroll
ads, and creator monetization. Facebook
began as a college social networking
site, then added sponsored posts and
became an advertising empire. Instagram
launched as a photo sharing app, then
integrated shopping features and
influencer partnerships. Each platform
followed the same arc. Start free to
build a user base, then introduce
monetization to sustain growth. The
alternative, subscription only models.
They simply don't scale to global
accessibility. If Chad GPT required a
monthly fee from day one, he would have
never reached 700 plus million active
users. Most of those users would have
never experienced the technology at all.
This is why Perplexity recent
announcement about advertising makes
perfect sense. In their blog post, they
explain the move. Experience has taught
us that subscriptions alone do not
generate enough revenue to create a
sustainable revenue sharing program,
especially given how rapidly our
publisher program is growing.
Advertising is the best way to ensure a
steady and scalable revenue stream.
They're being transparent about their
economics. They want to share revenue
with publishers whose content they're
referencing, but to do so sustainably,
they need advertising income that scales
with usage. The user value exchange
remains the same as it always has been.
You get free access to incredibly
powerful technology, and in return, you
see some advertisements that are
relevant to your interests. It's the
same tradeoff you make when you watch
YouTube or use Google or even scroll
through Instagram. The difference with
AI search is that the advertising
integration can be more helpful and less
disruptive. Instead of banner ads or
pop-ups, you get sponsored questions
that are actually relevant to your
conversation or product recommendations
that fit the context of what you're
researching. When Perplexity shows you
sponsored follow-up questions, they're
still using their AI to generate the
answers. The sponsors don't write the
responses. They're paying for the
opportunity to have their relevant
products considered in the AI's
recommendations. I believe 2026
represents the year when AI search
completes its transition from
experimental technology to mainstream
marketing channel. The infrastructure is
already being built. The timelines
already set. The business models are
taking shape. If you want to learn more
specific strategies we're using to get
our clients featured in the AI answers
today and positioned for advertising
integration that's coming, watch this
video X.